---
title: "Digital Leader: 5 Simple Keys to Success and Influence - Chapter 16: Empower Others"
author: "Erik Qualman"
type: book-chapter
year: 2012
url: https://learning-oreilly-com.ezproxy.library.uvic.ca/library/view/digital-leader-5/9780071792424/ch16.html
apa: "Qualman, E. (2012). Empower others. In Digital leader: 5 simple keys to success and influence. McGraw-Hill. https://learning-oreilly-com.ezproxy.library.uvic.ca/library/view/digital-leader-5/9780071792424/ch16.html"
---

## Full Chapter Text

CHAPTER SIXTEEN\nEmpower Others\n\n“The older I get, the more I want to keep score. Will people be better off when I quit than when I started?”1\n\n—BILL CLINTON\n\nAs discussed in the last chapter, connections are vital to anyone’s success. As a digital leader, however, you can’t act like Moses on the mountaintop delivering your commandments and expect everyone to follow. Great ideas can come from anywhere and anyone. As we’ve built up our connections, part of their value is the wisdom they will be able to supply. Every connection we have knows something that we do not. The key is making sure our connections feel empowered to not only share information, but to move forward and take initiative to help accomplish shared objectives. Timberland’s CEO Jeff Swartz puts it this way, “You don’t want to be led by someone that has a point of view and is clinging to it despite new data. My mind is open to insight whenever it comes and I’m flexible enough to respond to it.”2\n\nBill George is the former CEO of Medtronic, Harvard professor, and author of Authentic Leadership. What he discovered during his research and career is even more applicable in a world where we are constantly connected. George concludes that empowerment is key:\n\n \n\nTo become authentic leaders, we must discard the myth that leadership means having legions of supporters following our direction as we ascend to the pinnacles of power. Only then can we realize that authentic leadership is about empowering others on their journeys … the transformation from “I” to “We” is the most important process leaders go through in becoming authentic.3\n\nAs a digital leader your main role is to create awareness and engagement. You need to provide enough information without causing confusion. You need to make people aware of the situation and help them understand it. The more they understand, the more engaged they become, and they will figure out each other’s strengths and weaknesses to accomplish the task.\n\nWith the digital revolution, you actually gain more influence as a leader when you share information. Remember that influence has surpassed information in terms of importance because information is cheap and easily accessible. Sharing information, however, doesn’t mean bombarding and overwhelming people with content. It’s a difficult balance, but the key is to avoid providing too much information that results in confusion. One trick to help avoid giving out too much information is to try removing a sentence from a paragraph and seeing if the paragraph still makes sense; if so, the sentence probably isn’t vital. Another trick is to simply keep all information to half a page or shorter.\n\nIf your non-profit is running a charitable 10K run and you send two volunteers a quick text telling them you are caught in traffic, then ask if they could please ensure vendor tents are OK and computer registration is up and running, you are instantly empowering your volunteers. The two volunteers quickly determine what needs to be done. Your one volunteer is great at vendor relations and he sets off to check on the tents, while the other volunteer heads over to make sure the computer registration program for runners check-in is ready to go. Along with empowerment and connections come partnerships and results.\n\nPartnerships\n\nPartnerships come in many different forms, but the key to successful ones are those in which two people, or groups, have different strengths. For example, talk shows that have two hosts that are too similar don’t usually last long. The same is true in romance (opposites attract) and in business. The goal of the arrangement is to empower both partners, providing support with their unique capabilities.\n\nJust like Magic Johnson understood he needed to surround himself with good basketball players on the court to win, in business he needed to surround himself with great business-people who possessed a different perspective. During an NBA game Magic famously turned to two successful businessmen sitting courtside and asked, “How do I get into business?”\n\nThat initial courtside question landed him a meeting with executive powerhouse Michael Ovitz (Creative Artists Agency). Despite being a living legend, Magic was humble, and knew he had to listen to people like Ovitz in order to learn and eventually succeed. Magic recalls (to Don Yeager of successmagazine.com) the first day that he met Ovitz:\n\n \n\n“I learned a couple of great lessons there with Michael Ovitz,” says Johnson. “The first is that if you want to be successful, you have to be willing to use every connection you’ve got. The second thing I learned is that if you want someone to be your mentor, you better be ready to listen and be humbled,” explains Johnson … “I had to prove to him I was serious and that I would listen … Michael Ovitz treated me like a man who had something to prove, and by that stage of my career, not many people treated me like that. I think I handled it right, and it made a great difference.”4\n\nOvitz makes a good point in that we need to use every connection we have. Remember our connections only become currency when we actually reach out to others for assistance. If we have done things properly, our connections will be more than willing to help us as we’ve already helped them in the past! It’s difficult to network when you are desperate for help; you must network before you need the network. We also all need to be humble; if we aren’t humble then we may not be as open to partnering with others when it would behoove both parties. Magic explains that partnerships have helped him. “Don’t be afraid to partner. I believe in partnerships—I have partnered my whole life. There is someone sitting there with expertise I can learn from, and they can learn from me. Then I can bring [that] back to those who live in urban America.”5 Companies need to do the same thing as Magic and treat customers like partners.\n\nPartnerships today don’t look like partnerships from the past which were often large and stagnant, with one partner having much more control over another. Instead, partnerships can often exist without contracts. In the case of Apple, a huge reason behind the success of the iPhone was the amount of applications that developers (not Apple) employees developed around the iPhone. In this fluid partnership, if Apple decides to take too favorable a path for itself (in terms of percentage of profits) then the developers may decide to build applications for another platform like Google’s Android. Conversely, if the developers abuse the Apple platform by developing inappropriate content then Apple can ban the developers from the platform. In effect there is a tacit “working contract” between both parties. Both are dependent on shared success. In this same vein, if Google’s social media network efforts fail, it will be due in large part to not appropriately fostering the necessary partnerships with developers and vendors to help build the platform.\n\nEliminating Draining Customers\n\nIt’s also perfectly OK, and recommended, to eliminate customers that digitally drain the organization. To “digitally drain” means that your organization exhausts countless employee hours responding to negative comments on blogs or incendiary tweets from specific customers. These customers may inappropriately and negatively influence others digitally (one-to-one with potential customers) that are considering using your product or service and are wasting your time. Companies sometimes need to “fire” cantankerous customers in order to better serve their best customers. Such a decision can be difficult, but there are times when a customer or client may simply not be a good fit with your organization. With Facebook, Twitter, other online social networks, and mobile applications, you must perform this type of triage with customers that don’t make good partners or be digitally drained by these underperformers.\n\nWe’ve already listed some digital listening tools to better determine star clients and customers from the malcontents. It has also become easier for companies to see if particular individuals or customers are a hassle for other companies. Companies can investigate others digital footprints and shadows to determine how much they are worth investing in, if at all.\n\nOiling a squeaky wheel is much different than oiling a broken one. We need to discover these “broken” customers and move them to the junkyard while giving giant digital hugs to our deserving customers. Junkyard means that we no longer conduct business with this customer. Digital Hugs mean making sure we reply to customers positively posting, that we make it as personal as we can, that we solicit their opinions, and that we make them feel like part of the process. In the offline world, if we saw the customers this would mean the relationship was strong enough that we would emphatically hug them. Too often companies, non-profits, organizations, and small businesses digitally focus on the vocal negative minority and don’t digitally hug their biggest supporters.\n\nBrad Anderson, Best Buy’s CEO, discovered that 100 million (about 20 percent) of Best Buy’s customers were actually costing the company money. If they could focus their energy on the other 80 percent, he figured the stores would be more fun to shop in and they would actually increase their profitability.6\n\n“Children learn more from what you are than what you teach.”\n\n—W.E.B. DUBOIS\n\nZen of Digital Leadership\n\nMany of the concepts, ideas, and digital tools discussed in this book shouldn’t appear overly technical. In other words, realize that if you are a technical neophyte you can still excel in digital leadership. Conversely, if you are a digital savant, remember that offline behavior and leadership constructs of the past centuries are still important.\n\nThat being said, there is much that I have gone over in these pages. However when all else fails dealing digitally, you can never go wrong with simply following the golden rule:\n\nBuddhism: Hurt not others in ways that you yourself would find hurtful\n\nChristianity: Do unto others what you would have them do unto you: this sums up the Law and the Prophets\n\nHinduism: This is the sum of duty: do naught unto others which would cause you pain if done to you\n\nIslam: No one of you is a believer until he desires for his brother that which he desires for himself\n\nJudaism: What is hateful to you, do not to your fellow man. That is the entire Law; all the rest is commentary\n\nIf you are truly overwhelmed with the digital revolution, the best approach digitally with your friends, family, coworkers, employees, and volunteers is to abide by the golden rule. This is the core to digitally empower others. Treat others how they would like to be treated. This should be easy for all of us. We all follow someone, so when it’s our turn to digitally lead we need to remember what we like and don’t like as followers.\n\nThree days a week social gaming company Zynga brings in acupuncturists to work on employees. Cofounder Eric Schlermeyer believes it helps ward off illness and enables employees to be more emotionally balanced. “If you treat your employee like an Olympic athlete he/she will provide extraordinary value.”7 Simply put, support your employees and they will support you. Give them the extra attention and benefits they deserve and they will respond positively. By empowering your employees or customers, they will empower you.\n\nKevin Rose, the founder of digital application company Milk and former Digg CEO, has a $50 monthly expense allocation per employee for them to each buy flowers when needed, enabling employees to truly stop and smell the roses each day. “It’s about realizing that beyond our world of writing code, there’s a real world,” explains Rose.8\n\nNegative Posts\n\nShortly after you were born, a loving parent or relative probably put your feet into some form of malleable putty or plaster. This was designed to preserve your cute little feet for decades to come. This action is relevant for our discussion, because it is the purest your foot will ever be—smooth, no warts or blemishes. It is also the smallest your foot will ever be.\n\nIn relation to purity, we can’t expect to go through life without getting our feet a little dirty; digital or otherwise. In time we will acquire blemishes on our feet. However, as our feet continue to grow, the percentage of impurities in relation to the size of the foot decrease. The same holds true when it comes to our goal for our digital footprints.\n\nWe can’t expect to please everyone all the time; so we should expect a few negative digital posts associated with us. Many people and companies take the wrong reactive strategy of focusing all their attention on trying to remove these negative items. A better place to focus our efforts is to proactively post all the good things we are doing, or have someone else post them for us—our digital shadow. If you are following your passion and giving more than you are taking from people, positive digital posts are certain to follow.\n\nIf you proactively have hundreds of items out there, then the few negative items are just a small part of an overall story. Think about some of the good books you have read recently. If the book was only 5 pages and you didn’t like 2 pages that is probably not a positive impression. However, if the book is 100 pages and you didn’t like 2 of the pages, then these two pages are just a small part of a larger picture. We should take the same approach with our life story or company branding; the more pages we produce the less weight the negative items will merit.\n\nAlso keep in mind that not all negative comments are bad. If someone points out you have a poppy seed in your teeth prior to doing an interview via Skype or if a reader points out a factual error on your blog, that’s helpful feedback. If you are a walking tour company in Amsterdam and you receive a negative review with a comment like “they never gave us a break; way too much walking,” that review will be seen as a positive endorsement for those travelers that love walking.\n\nFocus on Positive Feedback\n\nAs companies and individuals, we need to avoid the knee-jerk reaction of spending all our time dealing with, or worrying over, the vocal minority. Bazaarvoice, the world’s leader in powering online reviews, has data indicating that 80 percent of people that review products with its U.S. clients give those products a four or five star rating (out of five stars). For its clients in the U.K., that figure jumps up to 88 percent. So we spend all our time concerned and working on negative comments when they only consist of 12-20 percent of our feedback. Let’s make sure we focus on some of the positive feedback and ratings and continue to play to our strengths.\n\nPlease understand I’m not saying ignore negative comments. I’m trying to get you to think differently than 99 percent of the world that puts negative comments first and foremost. Certainly we should address negative comments and concerns as they present a tremendous opportunity for improvement and to connect with, and empower, our customers.\n\n“The role of leaders is not to get other people to follow them but to empower others to lead,”\n\n—BILL GEORGE,\nMedtronic CEO &\nHarvard Professor\n\nFedEx has found that customers who had an issue the company was able to resolve are four times more likely to repeat business than those customers that never encountered a problem. Some of my biggest supporters today were my toughest book critiques a few years back when my first book Socialnomics was published. These people wanted to voice their concerns, and by reaching out to them and discussing their issues with the book, a relationship was built. The foundation of this relationship was our vested interest in the topic of the book. By engaging with the reader, I was able to empower them. By engaging with your customers, you will be doing the same.\n\nIf you reach out to customers digitally you will be amazed by the results. In the rare instance where this action doesn’t work, remember to move on quickly—there are many other faithful followers to engage. Don’t ignore positive posters.\n\nDIGITAL DEEDS “Huddle Up”\n\nThere is still no replacement for face-to-face communication in connecting with others and creating an empowered customer or employee base. Unproductive meetings, either corporate or personal, however, can be time wasters and morale deflators. The world has changed and we need to change with it. The next time a meeting is required try the following:\n\n1. Send out a quick, well-defined agenda with goals\n\n2. Remove the chairs and huddle like a sports team: people will get tired of standing inherently making the meeting shorter\n\n3. The circular huddle also helps make everyone equal as there is no head of the table\n\n4. Summarize verbally and electronically what was accomplished at the end of each meeting so that everyone knows what the action items are. This summary helps limit the number of future meetings.\n\nJim Donald, the former CEO of Starbucks, often had the positive habit of stopping one-hour meetings after 45 minutes and telling employees to use their extra 15 minutes to call someone they usually did not contact every day.9\n\nChris Brogan, former project manager and New York Times best-selling author, suggests doing all the running around and question-and-answer stuff before any status meeting. “Our meetings were never more than 10 minutes long, even when working on huge data center build-outs. Get decisions out of the way quickly. Never leave something up in the air, so we’d decide, and if the decision was a bad one, we’d fix it later.”\n\nLessons Learned from Chilean Miners\n\nIn the fall of 2010, 33 Chilean miners were trapped 2,000 feet below the earth’s surface for 69 days. Luis Urzua was the shift boss of the crew. Urzua didn’t know it when his shift started, but his legacy would be secured as the main reason why all the miners were successfully rescued 69 days after their shift began. Urzua exhibited the five principles of STAMP discussed in this book to help triumph in the face of adversity. He wouldn’t have been able to do so, however, if it wasn’t for the relationship between the miners and their mutual support and empowerment of one another.\n\nSimplify\n\nFrom the beginning of the event, despite being trapped almost a half mile underground, Urzua stressed the importance of trying to make the days as normal as possible. He wanted the team to try and simulate a regular “shift” each and every day. Lights were turned on during the day and turned off at night. Urzua understood that in life it is much easier to get through one day, from sun up to sun down, than trying to combat the past and tomorrow: combating tomorrow or the past is an exercise in futility.\n\nYet, many of us who have never suffered such hardship as being trapped in a mine constantly worry about the past and future. We worry about unread emails, that a customer might post something negative about our company, that our children are going to grow up addicted to video games, or a thousand other things. Just as worrying about the past or tomorrow wouldn’t help the miners it doesn’t help any of us that want to become true digital leaders.\n\nTrue\n\nUrzua remained true to himself and the other miners. It would have been difficult for him to lead if the other 32 miners thought Urzua didn’t have their best interests at heart. Much of this trust was built by Urzua’s actions prior to the incident, not during the ordeal. A miner that had worked with Urzua prior to the incident described him as being “very protective of his people and obviously loves them, and would not have left until all his men were safely aboveground.”10\n\nThis connection is important to note. We talked in this book about the importance of building your network before you need the network—a similar philosophy exists with trust. Build trust with customers, employees, and partners before you need it, rather than when you need it as this will prove to be much more effective. Fittingly, Urzua requested to be the last man lifted from the shaft after all the others were safe.\n\nAction\n\nUrzua made sure that in the early days while they were rationing the food supply (see below details under Map) that everyone ate at the same time and as a group. If everyone saw that they were each getting a meager teaspoon of tuna and a quarter cup of milk there would be less chance of bickering. Showing employees or customers that you care about them equally creates a better, lasting relationship.\n\nMap\n\nWhile Urzua simplified things to a day-to-day level, it was important as the leader to know a little about where they wanted to, or needed to, go. Most of the miners thought they would be rescued in a few days so it would have been easy to eat through all the rations of food quickly.\n\nHowever, Urzua planned for the worst, but expected the best. It turns out this approach saved 33 lives. The miners weren’t discovered in a few days, rather 17 full days. It was a full 69 days until their rescue. Urzua indicated they were lucky to ration the food supply, which was tuna, mackarel, peaches, and milk designed to last 48 hours. With Urzua’s guidance they made the food last for all of those 17 days.\n\nLuck is often made when preparation meets opportunity. Urzua said, “We saw the collapsed rock, many thought it would be two days before our discovery. But I knew otherwise.” When the outside world first made contact by pounding a narrow hole into their location, the miners were so happy “everyone wanted to hug the hammer.”11\n\nPart of the miner’s mapping was reminding the team of why they wanted to survive when it seemed hopeless. One miner’s wife had a baby and he wanted to see his newborn. Another miner vowed to propose to his girlfriend. These visions helped them stay the course by making it mission focused. When we know our mission in life, everything else is simplified.\n\nWhen we launch new ideas with our company or start using a new technology as a family it’s best to prepare for the worst, but to expect the best. Run through and be prepared to tackle as many difficult scenarios as possible, but don’t let fear limit your positive visions and expectations.\n\nPeople\n\nWhile trapped, if one or two miners were to abscond from the mission it could easily have snowballed into mutiny. Urzua lead by assigning each person a specific task—everyone had a role to play. With everyone seeing the plan Urzua laid out, teamwork was much easier to follow. By the end, the miners were so bonded that even after their removal they requested to stay on site (rather than go straight to the hospital) until every miner was safely lifted up from below.\n\n“I can never be what I ought to be until you are what you ought to be.”\n\n—MARTIN LUTHER\nKING JR.\n\nThe cliché “what doesn’t kill us, makes us stronger” can be at times seen as trite, but it is certainly true. Urzua was the last man rescued from the mine; a mine he entered as a shift boss and left as a national hero. Chilean President Sebastian Pinera greeted Urzua with, “You have been relieved, coming out last like a good captain. You have no idea how all Chileans shared with you your anguish, your hope, and your joy. You are not the same, and the country is not the same after this. You are an inspiration.”12\n\nWithout Urzua’s connection to his team, his ability to lead and empower the group, the ending of this story could have been much different. Thankfully, through mutual cooperation and careful planning, all 33 miners were saved.\n\nDIGITAL DEEDS Connecting with People\n\nHere are three ways to connect with people online that will help lead to lasting relationships and empowerment for individuals, customers, employees, and other business partners.\n\nFacebook Phonebook: Find mobile numbers using Facebook’s Phonebook. If you ever need a phone number of one of your connections on Facebook they may have entered it on their profile. Go to Friends → Edit Friends → Phonebook. This will list all of your friends that have listed their phone numbers. Aren’t friends with the person? Most likely someone in your social graph is connected to that person so start to network—hence why they are called social networks. You can do similar searches and networking on LinkedIn for phone numbers and emails. The key to remember is that you need to network before you need the network. In other words, the first time you reach out to people you shouldn’t ask for a favor. In fact, you should do the opposite and do them a favor.\n\nFacebook Groups: Easily share and communicate with smaller sets of friends. If you’ve accumulated hundreds of friends on Facebook and want an easier way to communicate with a few close ones, try setting up a group. From your home page, click “Create Group” in the left hand menu. Choose a group name and instantly add the friends you want involved. You can also choose what level of privacy you want for the group: open, closed, or secret. If you create a closed or secret group, only members will be able to see what is posted. Start one today for your family, book club, soccer team, or study group.\n\nStatus Tagging: Whenever you want to mention someone on Facebook, you can just type the @ symbol, start typing their name, and then choose them from the dropdown menu. They’ll get an email notification that they’ve been tagged, similarly to how photo tags work. It’s a quick and easy way to let your friends know to join the conversation.\n\nThe Power of Empowering Others\n\nAs a digital leader you need to empower your employees and family and make certain that everyone understands their role. Empowering others is one of the greatest gifts you can give the world today and leave behind for future generations. Living in a fully transparent world we can all see what others are doing and it’s important for us to know how we fit in with others. When certain roles shift real time as a result of internal or external forces, it’s important to communicate this change to everyone as it happens. We need to understand how we can help others on their journey and if we can help them digitally we need to do so in as many instances in which we are able. To this extent, if we ever become overwhelmed or confused by the technological advances that swirl around us, you can never go wrong if you follow the golden rule that has been passed down for generations: if you treat others how you’d like to be treated digitally you will never be short of support or fulfillment.\n\n“I make a living from speaking, but it’s from a lifetime spent listening.”\n\n—@EQUALMAN\n\ntable of contents\nclose x\nDigital Leader: 5 Simple Keys to Success and Influence\n\nErik Qualman\n\nPublished by McGraw-Hill\nqueue\n1% complete\nContent Progress 0% completed\nApprox. 6 hours left\nCollapse\nContents\nHighlights\nCover Page\nDigital Leader\nCopyright Page\nContents\nAcknowledgments\nChapter One: Life, Leadership, Legacy\nSection One: Simple\nSection Two: True\nSection Three: Act\nSection Four: Map\nSection Five: People\n4% complete\nConclusion\nEndnotes\nFree Tools To Track Your Digital Footprints And Shadows\nDigital Legacy Submissions\nIndex\nsearch\nSettings\nChapter Sixteen: Empower Others\nqueue\nDigital Leader: 5 Simple Keys to Success and Influence