---
title: "Blog #2 Lecture Video - Personal vs Professional Digital Identity"
author: "Jesse Miller"
type: video
year: 2026
url: https://youtu.be/Y26kND1f_ns
apa: "Miller, J. (2026). Blog #2 lecture video [Video]. YouTube. https://youtu.be/Y26kND1f_ns"
---

## Transcript

All right. EDCI 338. We are in our week two blog. We're moving into a section basically focusing on our mapping of our visitor and residents. I wanna highlight to you why this part of the course is important, because it really gives us a division of where we could establish as a society where our social media should be reflective in our personal use or professional use. But it also gives us the ability to lay it out and look at where some of it has an overlap.

And so as you do the course reading, just know that the reading itself for this part here is not anything academic. It's actually reflective. It's a short quiz from University of British Columbia, Digital Tattoo program. This has been in place for almost a decade now. It's a wonderful resource for us in BC. Digitaltattoo.ubc.ca. The quiz itself is pretty straightforward. Questions ranging from, "My digital identity is..." "The best thing about being online is..." "When interacting online, my biggest worry is..." When you answer these questions and you go through, this is gonna give you an opportunity to kind of think about how you've already used the internet as a social media function in your everyday life, and then where it fits into your professional endeavors moving forward.

But one of the things I want to highlight here is that despite it being a 12-question quiz, the reflective pieces for yourself are just to give you an idea of your digital footprint, digital tattoo itself. But let's get away from the misnomers of footprints and tattoos being good or bad. We all leave footprints in our everyday lives, whether we see them or not. We tangibly interact with people in the sense of our demeanor and how we choose to treat others, especially reflectively in looking at graciousness and kindness. So if you had a positive experience with somebody, let's say, in the service industry this week, their imprint of you is reflective of the interaction that you had. But they may also have taken that home and said, "You know, I had not a great day today, but there's this one customer that was lovely. There was this one human being that was great to interact with." And that is something in our society we rely on.

So in our social media space, the same thing exists in the sense of where we have like buttons and subscribe and follow. And so the more that we build out these brands in the sense of our names, in the sense of our endeavors, our professional capacities, it's no different than a resume, it's no different than a social media presence. And so asking the question, how do we use this as a digital tool in our sense of our citizenship and our societal participation really is important.

So the quiz itself, 12 questions, really easy to knock out. But the visitor and mapping, resident mapping exercise, that's what I want you to think about in the sense of the reading. Work through the PDF. I'm gonna put a link to a really great video as well. It's 30 minutes. I don't need you to look at the entire thing, but if you are kind of confused about the layout itself, parse through the video and get a good idea of what it means to kind of put this into a spreadsheet for yourself and look at the way that you use the internet.

I'm going to share with you an example from my own use. I go back in time with this one. I've used this throughout the course. But it really does give an idea of where professional does kind of cross over into personal. As I've used social media over the period of 20 years, I've decided to scale back a little bit. I've done more with less in the sense of engaging with friends and family. You also learn very quickly that having a huge amount of followers isn't necessarily beneficial in the sense of our everyday capacities. Sometimes we don't want every aspect of our lives available online. And as you grow into certain roles in life, you also identify that if you're not doing it to monetize, if you're not doing it to network, nobody really wants to know everything about you, but until they're motivated to.

So in that space of networking, for jobs, yes, of course people are doing their due diligence in the sense of people connecting for personal relationships. There is always the creep who's going through a couple years of Instagram content to see what they can learn. But the thing is, we use that word creep — it is a normative in our connected society today to go and look somebody up online. But how do we present that to people? How do we tell them, "Oh, by the way, I looked you up"? Do we have confidence with it, or do we shy away and hide the idea that we were maybe for our own benefit doing some due diligence?

So when I ask the questions for our second blog, I wanna highlight here, create your map, share it, make sure that you find a way to share it, and attribute yourself. You can use Canva if you're using a program like that. Feel free to use Microsoft Paint. I've had students hand in hand-drawn ones as well. Just sketch it out and take a photograph and post it. I just want to see that you've put the effort into creating something. The more creative the better, obviously, but the reality of it is, you're being marked and reflected on your understanding of the concept, not so much on your artistic ability, because this is not an art class. But again, wow me with what your talents are, and I will just be wowed.

The questions as they exist though — what digital platforms are students currently using to develop the professional network? I just want you to kind of brainstorm a little bit about what it means to be a UVic student. Ask yourself the question, what do I use to network? Include Mattermost. That is an example you can apply and automatically get points. When it comes to the idea of what could the student consider in expanding their professional learning network, I'm just asking you to be reflective of yourself. If you are looking to build out your brand in the sense of an employable individual, as a graduate of UVic, what will you do to network yourself in the spaces where you'll be hired, and maybe even vetted by programs that are only looking at your resume through artificial intelligence?

And then in your blog submission itself, how would an employer respond if you applied for a job with them and they assessed your social media presence basically right there in real time? If they were telling you that while you were speaking they were doing a deep dive into your social media. Just ask yourself, what would that look like? Reflectively put it into your blog submission.

And then what I'm looking for in your blog submissions with replies to each other — we're gonna have network groups by the fourth week, give or take. But the Mattermost group is where I want to see that participation. Tell me that you commented on somebody's blog. Show me the replies. And that's where I'm gonna go back throughout the term and look at your participation values. And so the more you comment on someone's content, really kind of read their work and give them good feedback, and participate in a corresponding way, that's gonna make it easier for me to measure when you're telling me that you participate in the course.

So blog two, really simple. Week three, really simple. Like I said, we're just trying to get things going. For the benefit of an asynchronous course, you'll notice that I'll reply really quickly through Mattermost. I'm gonna try to get to everybody with a response as best I can.
