---
title: "EDCI 338 Week 4 Course Video - Inclusion & Community Engagement"
author: "Jesse Miller"
type: video
year: 2026
url: https://youtu.be/doJgDjA3QPo
apa: "Miller, J. (2026). EDCI 338 Week 4 course video [Video]. YouTube. https://youtu.be/doJgDjA3QPo"
---

## Transcript

**Note:** This video is marked as "MUST WATCH" by the instructor.

All right, EDCI 338. It is our week four. Technically, blog post three. I just touch on a couple notes from the past week. I know I put a couple of reviews up for some students. I'm reviewing each blog individually, and I'll give back individual feedback and public feedback, not necessarily in set orders. Just keep in mind here, this is a collaborative, reflective course where we do move forward together. And so individuals who have had some issues logging in, set up their WordPress, don't fret. Do the work, email it to me, send me a note on Mattermost and I'll review. It doesn't have to be formally set in your blog for me to know that you've done it. But once your blog is set up, I wanna see the creativity come in. I wanna see how you engage parts of the course content with discourse with your fellow students.

And when we think about the way that we're approaching this, this is reflective of many work environments now, where people collaborate, work from home, work remotely, and work on timelines that are set sometimes very rigidly, other times with lots of flexibility based on project management. And so when we look at social media and communications, bear in mind that some project plans will have to be in real time. Those of you in education track, you'll know that this is more about core competency and addressing curriculum, how we utilize these tools in the classroom. That becomes part of the conversation as we move into our term in February. But for those of you in interdisciplinary studies who are coming in and kind of wondering where this fits in, this is as equally a business dialogue. This is equally a conversation about ethos in the workplace, whether it be in public service, corporate, wherever we may land.

So keep in mind where we're going with the conversation today — we did our VNR mapping, and we looked at where we fit into the paradigm of personal communications, professional communications, using certain tools. Reflectively, I like how many of you took a little bit of a deep dive into your own use, reflected on your own questions of what does it mean to be a resident in one space and kind of evolve out of it. In comparison to previous years, I do like the confidence of many of you, not necessarily being afraid of what you've done on social media, but recognizing that the past 15 years of social media use has come with a lot of shame to individuals, and we need to actually migrate away from that.

Obviously, how we treat others and our discourse towards others when it comes to hate and misogyny, and any form of projecting one's own value onto others in social media spaces still has to be held to account. When we look at the power of this tool, especially in our current climate of political radicalization, when we see what's happening maybe in the United States and around the world when it comes to advocacy, there are obviously hotspots on this planet that have never really cooled down. And social media's played a prominent role in how individuals themselves have gotten the world to pay attention. And their digital identity is rooted in being advocates and using these tools to promote social change.

So with that in mind, our approach this week is gonna look at a couple of those values. And just keep in mind, we're going to use our week four, your PLN inclusion and community engagement section. And the idea of diversity in your PLN. Who are you learning from? Are we participating in a silo of affirmation or an echo chamber of thought process? And that's one of the things we have to keep in mind here is that some of the number one podcasts in the world are subscribed to because people share like-minded ideas and very much hear validations. And when they hear those podcasters, the hosts of those shows, dive into current events and maybe push back against dialogues that maybe would be aligned with the viewpoints of the listeners, then you get the social pushback of, "Oh, we're never listening to you again," or, "I can't believe that you are X, Y, Z."

And just keep in mind here, whether you're left or right on your own spectrum of politics or human rights or whatever it is that we subscribe to, the middle is where we have to meet. Because as a population, the divisiveness is not teaching us in any way, shape, or form what it's like to be the other person in our every day. And so when we ask the questions, "Are you learning from a variety of diverse voices?" and "Are you expanding your understanding of the view of others?", it's not necessarily agreeing with the view of others, but it's also just understanding where their view is rooted and what influences guide that.

And so, for the majority of loud voices right now that are falling in spaces where we say, "That's a really horrible thing to say, I can't believe you would say that about another human being," keep in mind, in a small town with not a lot of diversity and not a lot of exposure to different viewpoints of the human experience, that may just be the mainstream narrative. And for them, the mainstream narrative can become subscribed and liked to by anybody on the planet, because we do live in a borderless society when it comes to the internet.

So when I ask the question, "What is the learning outcome of your PLN and how are you ensuring your exposure to diversity inclusion?" it's not the idea that something falls into your doomscrolling of reels and go, "Ew, I don't like that. Why is that there?" It's the question of, are you willing to sit in the uncomfortableness so that you can learn why somebody believes that their version of right is the absolute correct path?

And when we hear speakers who advocate not only for diversity, inclusion, but equitable participation in our spaces of not only work, but learning, education — it isn't necessarily about subscribing and saying, "The entire world needs to be more liberal or more conservative." It's about where do we, as participants in society, find one another and understand that if we have a common goal in the sense of our safety, our securities, our want for aspects of freedom and using those freedoms to move individuals forward and help support others, especially when it comes to the social networks that we really do rely on. Not social networks in the sense of internet, but social networks in the sense of our everyday society. Health care, access to clean water. Things like that. It doesn't always fall on government. It falls on those who make up the society to not only maintain but create the social constructs, expectations that we all kind of would say, "This is important for our everyday safety and security in living."

So our PLN Diversity & Inclusion on Social Media video will be Shelley Moore, who's a fantastic British Columbian resource. Dr. Shelley Moore is based in the Lower Mainland Metro Vancouver area, and the video series is called Five Moore Minutes. The video of selection is one that I very much enjoy hearing Shelley speak to, and as a friend and a colleague, I will always advocate for their work.

But one of the community communications — this is just going to be a video, small video, created at Stanford about three years ago. Former president, Barack Obama, just talking about where the internet falls into our everyday discourse, everyday participation in society. Where the biggest threats are when it comes to disinformation.

And what I'd like you to do is look at the associated readings. One, for Dr. Shelley Moore, it's their writings, so it's a small little section. It's in the UVic Library. And the other one being chapter four, New Vision for Public Media: Open, Dynamic, and Participatory Discourse. This one's in the UVic Library as well. And I encourage you to review chapter four, glean over what you need.

As a note, I did put this into Mattermost this past week. This is a third-year course. I don't necessarily think I have to be reminding students to add citations, references, and attribute your content, but we gave a little nudge this week. I will be looking for it moving forward, and if you do choose to go back into your blogs and correct that, that's absolutely fine. But make sure that when you are creating generalized thought processes from supplied course content, you are very much referencing that in your work, and then attributing where you source that from, even if it came from the course content.

Your blog post number three — how is your thinking about inclusion and PLN evolved? When it comes down to the base questions of how does social media engage communications, how does social media challenge communications — that social media challenging communications is really important to kind of lock into that Barack Obama video. Is it inclusive? Bring that back from the first video with Dr. Shelley Moore. And as you go through and we kind of discuss what it means to have a PLN amplifying the views of others, just look what it means to sometimes be the loudest voice in the room, but also the one who can make the most space for others who may not have as equal footing.

And at the same time, policies of an employer. I just want you to think about for the purpose of moving forward in your career progression, what do the social media policies of an employer look like? What are the protections met for us as an employee? What if you're employed as a union member versus a contracted member? When we see people post something on social media and then a week later we hear their employer has distanced themselves from that individual, what does that mean in the sense of our connected world becoming something where we do say something in a space that is deemed to be, "Well, I have freedom of speech," in American rhetoric, or, "I have freedom of expression" — in Canada we have to recognize the differences between the two.

And the idea of what are the benefits of a diverse and inclusive PLN in social media, just ask yourself, who are you learning from? What is the purpose of your PLN in your professional capacity, your learning capacity? What does it mean to find things that just interest you versus things that may be uncomfortable but are pushing you to understand why others are comfortable in that space?
